update secure protect connect fixing commands (#1046)
Kuadrant/kuadrant-operator: doc/user-guides/full-walkthrough/secure-protect-connect-openshift.md

# Secure, protect, and connect APIs with Kuadrant

## Overview

This guide walks you through using Kuadrant to secure, protect, and connect an API exposed by a Gateway (Kubernetes Gateway API) from the personas platform engineer and application developer. For more information on the different personas please see the [Gateway API documentation](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/roles-and-personas/#key-roles-and-personas)

## Prerequisites

> - Completed the steps in [Install Kuadrant on an OpenShift cluster](../../install/install-openshift.md).

Reviewer: Are we keeping the OpenShift and K8s separate still?  Perhaps should link both options
```suggestion
- Completed the steps in [Install Kuadrant on an OpenShift cluster](../../install/install-openshift.md).
```

Author: i had them both and then i ended up separating so it would only have to be tested on openshift for now and get something out for Stephen and then look at merging after

```bash
kubectl -n ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS} create secret generic aws-credentials \
  --type=kuadrant.io/aws \
  --from-literal=AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=$KUADRANT_AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID \
  --from-literal=AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=$KUADRANT_AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY
```

Before adding a TLS issuer, create the secret credentials in the cert-manager namespace:

```bash
kubectl -n cert-manager create secret generic aws-credentials \
  --type=kuadrant.io/aws \
  --from-literal=AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=$KUADRANT_AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID \
  --from-literal=AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=$KUADRANT_AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY
```

### Deploy the Toystore app

Create the namespace for the Toystore application:

```bash

kubectl create ns ${KUADRANT_DEVELOPER_NS}
```

Deploy the Toystore app to the developer namespace:

```bash
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Kuadrant/Kuadrant-operator/main/examples/toystore/toystore.yaml -n ${KUADRANT_DEVELOPER_NS}
```

### Setup Toystore application HTTPRoute

```bash

kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: toystore
  namespace: ${KUADRANT_DEVELOPER_NS}
  labels:
    deployment: toystore
    service: toystore
spec:

>   parentRefs:

Reviewer: There is no parent ref here?

Author: Oh good catch added the rules parameter in twice

  rules:
  - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: Gateway
    name: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}

>     namespace: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAMESPACE}

Reviewer: This is the wrong envvar

export KUADRANT_DEVELOPER_NS=toystore
export KUADRANT_AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=xxxx
export KUADRANT_AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=xxxx
export KUADRANT_AWS_REGION=us-east-1
export KUADRANT_AWS_DNS_PUBLIC_ZONE_ID=xxxx
export KUADRANT_ZONE_ROOT_DOMAIN=example.com
export KUADRANT_CLUSTER_ISSUER_NAME=lets-encrypt
export KUADRANT_EMAIL=foo@example.com
```

### Set up a DNS Provider

The DNS provider declares credentials to access the zone(s) that Kuadrant can use to set up DNS configuration. Ensure that this credential only has access to the zones you want managed

Create the namespace the Gateway will be deployed in

```bash
kubectl create ns ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS}
```

Create the secret credentials in the same namespace as the Gateway

```bash
kubectl -n ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS} create secret generic aws-credentials \
  --type=kuadrant.io/aws \
  --from-literal=KUADRANT_AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=$KUADRANT_AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID \
  --from-literal=KUADRANT_AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=$KUADRANT_AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY
```

Before adding a TLS issuer, create the secret credentials in the cert-manager namespace

```bash
kubectl -n cert-manager create secret generic aws-credentials \
  --type=kuadrant.io/aws \

>   --from-literal=KUADRANT_AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=$KUADRANT_AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID \

Author: yup realised replaced all by mistake

```

### Override the Gateway's deny-all AuthPolicy 

### Set up API key auth flow

Set up an example API key for the new users:

```bash
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: bob-key
  namespace: ${KUADRANT_DEVELOPER_NS}
  labels:
    authorino.kuadrant.io/managed-by: authorino
    app: toystore
  annotations:
    secret.kuadrant.io/user-id: bob
stringData:
  api_key: IAMBOB
type: Opaque
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: alice-key
  namespace: ${KUADRANT_DEVELOPER_NS}
  labels:
    authorino.kuadrant.io/managed-by: authorino
    app: toystore
  annotations:
    secret.kuadrant.io/user-id: alice
stringData:
  api_key: IAMALICE
type: Opaque
EOF
```

Create a new AuthPolicy in a different namespace that overrides the `Deny all` created earlier:

```bash
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: kuadrant.io/v1
kind: AuthPolicy
metadata:
  name: toystore-auth
  namespace: ${KUADRANT_DEVELOPER_NS}
spec:
  targetRef:
    group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: HTTPRoute
    name: toystore

>   rules:

Reviewer: needs the same health predicate

```

#### DNS Health checks
DNS Health checks has been enabled on the DNSPolicy. These health checks will flag a published endpoint as healthy or unhealthy based on the defined configuration. When unhealthy an endpoint will not be published if it has not already been published to the DNS provider, will only be unpublished if it is part of a multi-value A record and in all cases can be observable via the DNSPolicy status. For more information see [DNS Health checks documentation](../dns/dnshealthchecks.md)

Check the status of the health checks as follow:

```bash
kubectl get dnspolicy ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}-dnspolicy -n ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS} -o=jsonpath='{.status.conditions[?(@.type=="SubResourcesHealthy")].message}'
```
### Test the `low-limit` and `deny all` policies

```bash
while :; do curl -k --write-out '%{http_code}\n' --silent --output /dev/null  "https://api.$KUADRANT_ZONE_ROOT_DOMAIN/cars" | grep -E --color "\b(429)\b|$"; sleep 1; done
```

### Override the Gateway's deny-all AuthPolicy 

### Set up API key auth flow

Set up an example API key for the new users:

```bash
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: bob-key

>   namespace: ${KUADRANT_DEVELOPER_NS}

Reviewer: This wont work. They need to be created in the kuadrant-system namespace

### Deploy the gateway TLS policy

```bash
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: kuadrant.io/v1
kind: TLSPolicy
metadata:
  name: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}-tls
  namespace: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS}
spec:
  targetRef:
    name: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}
    group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: Gateway
  issuerRef:
    group: cert-manager.io
    kind: ClusterIssuer
    name: ${KUADRANT_CLUSTER_ISSUER_NAME}
EOF
```

Check that the `TLSpolicy` has an Accepted and Enforced status (This may take a few minutes for certain provider e.g Lets Encrypt):

```bash
kubectl get tlspolicy ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}-tls -n ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS} -o=jsonpath='{.status.conditions[?(@.type=="Accepted")].message}{"\n"}{.status.conditions[?(@.type=="Enforced")].message}'
```

### Setup Toystore application HTTPRoute

```bash

kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: toystore
  namespace: ${KUADRANT_DEVELOPER_NS}
  labels:
    deployment: toystore
    service: toystore
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}
    namespace: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS}
  hostnames:
  - "api.${KUADRANT_ZONE_ROOT_DOMAIN}"
  rules:

>   - matches:

Reviewer 2: need a `/health` path

    - method: GET
      path:
        type: PathPrefix
        value: "/cars"
    backendRefs:
    - name: toystore
      port: 80  
EOF
```

While the `Gateway` is now deployed, it currently has exposed endpoints. The next steps will be defining an `AuthPolicy` to set up a default `403` response for any unprotected endpoints, as well as a `RateLimitPolicy` to set up a default unrealistic low global limit to further protect any exposed endpoints.

### Set the `Deny all` Gateway AuthPolicy

```bash
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: kuadrant.io/v1
kind: AuthPolicy
metadata:
  name: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}-auth
  namespace: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS}
spec:
  targetRef:
    group: gateway.networking.k8s.io

>     kind: Gateway

Reviewer: when:
     - predicate: "request.path != '/health'"

```bash
kubectl get authpolicy ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}-auth -n ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS} -o=jsonpath='{.status.conditions[?(@.type=="Accepted")].message}{"\n"}{.status.conditions[?(@.type=="Enforced")].message}'

```

### Deploy the `low-limit` Gateway RateLimitPolicy

```bash
kubectl apply -f  - <<EOF
apiVersion: kuadrant.io/v1
kind: RateLimitPolicy
metadata:
  name: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}-rlp
  namespace: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS}
spec:
  targetRef:
    group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: Gateway
    name: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}
  defaults:
    limits:
      "low-limit":
        rates:
        - limit: 1
          window: 10s
EOF
```

Check that the `RateLimitPolicy` has Accepted and Enforced status:

```bash
kubectl get ratelimitpolicy ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}-rlp -n ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS} -o=jsonpath='{.status.conditions[?(@.type=="Accepted")].message}{"\n"}{.status.conditions[?(@.type=="Enforced")].message}'
```
### Create the Gateway DNSPolicy

```bash
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: kuadrant.io/v1
kind: DNSPolicy
metadata:
  name: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}-dnspolicy
  namespace: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS}
spec:
  healthCheck:
    failureThreshold: 3

>     interval: 5m

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    interval: 1m
```

    path: /health
  loadBalancing:
    defaultGeo: true
    geo: GEO-NA
    weight: 120
  targetRef:
    name: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}
    group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: Gateway
  providerRefs:
  - name: aws-credentials # Secret created earlier
EOF
```

> Check that the `DNSPolicy` has been Accepted and Enforced (This mat take a few minutes):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Check that the `DNSPolicy` has been Accepted and Enforced (This may take a few minutes):
```

```bash
kubectl get dnspolicy ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}-dnspolicy -n ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS} -o=jsonpath='{.status.conditions[?(@.type=="Accepted")].message}{"\n"}{.status.conditions[?(@.type=="Enforced")].message}'
```

#### DNS Health checks
DNS Health checks has been enabled on the DNSPolicy. These health checks will flag a published endpoint as healthy or unhealthy based on the defined configuration. When unhealthy an endpoint will not be published if it has not already been published to the DNS provider, will only be unpublished if it is part of a multi-value A record and in all cases can be observable via the DNSPolicy status. For more information see [DNS Health checks documentation](../dns/dnshealthchecks.md)

Check the status of the health checks as follow:

```bash
kubectl get dnspolicy ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}-dnspolicy -n ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS} -o=jsonpath='{.status.conditions[?(@.type=="SubResourcesHealthy")].message}'
```
### Test the `low-limit` and `deny all` policies

```bash

> while :; do curl -k --write-out '%{http_code}\n' --silent --output /dev/null  "https://api.$KUADRANT_ZONE_ROOT_DOMAIN/cars" | grep -E --color "\b(429)\b|$"; sleep 1; done

Reviewer 2: I get `000` responses at this point, even with a wait.

The DNSPolicy notes:

```yaml
 observedGeneration: 1
  recordConditions:
    api.jm.hcpapps.net:
      - lastTransitionTime: '2024-12-06T11:19:45Z'
        message: Not publishing unhealthy records
        observedGeneration: 1
        reason: HealthChecksFailed
        status: 'False'
        type: Ready
      - lastTransitionTime: '2024-12-06T11:18:28Z'
        message: 'Not healthy addresses: [a513d0538806a46d4a1a4ea8513721e8-651718075.eu-west-1.elb.amazonaws.com]'
        observedGeneration: 1
        reason: HealthChecksFailed
        status: 'False'
        type: Healthy
  totalRecords: 1
```

```

### (Optional) Configure metrics to be scraped from the Gateway instance

If Prometheus is installed on the cluster, set up a `PodMonitor` to configure it to scrape metrics directly from the Gateway pod.
This must be done in the namespace where the Gateway is running. For a list of the metrics you'll get see the Kuadrant [docs](https://docs.kuadrant.io/0.11.0/kuadrant-operator/doc/observability/metrics/)

```bash
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF

> apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1

Reviewer: I don't feel like this actually adds that much and is a bit jarring in the flow. Might make more sense in an observability walkthrough?

Author: sure ill remove it

          sourceLabels:
            ["__meta_kubernetes_pod_annotationpresent_prometheus_io_scrape"]
        - action: replace
          regex: (\d+);(([A-Fa-f0-9]{1,4}::?){1,7}[A-Fa-f0-9]{1,4})
          replacement: "[\$2]:\$1"
          sourceLabels:
            [
              "__meta_kubernetes_pod_annotation_prometheus_io_port",
              "__meta_kubernetes_pod_ip",
            ]
          targetLabel: "__address__"
        - action: replace
          regex: (\d+);((([0-9]+?)(\.|$)){4})
          replacement: "\$2:\$1"
          sourceLabels:
            [
              "__meta_kubernetes_pod_annotation_prometheus_io_port",
              "__meta_kubernetes_pod_ip",
            ]
          targetLabel: "__address__"
        - action: labeldrop
          regex: "__meta_kubernetes_pod_label_(.+)"
        - sourceLabels: ["__meta_kubernetes_namespace"]
          action: replace
          targetLabel: namespace
        - sourceLabels: ["__meta_kubernetes_pod_name"]
          action: replace
          targetLabel: pod_name
EOF
```

### Override the Gateway's deny-all AuthPolicy 

### Set up API key auth flow

Set up an example API key for the new users:

```bash

> kubectl --context $KUBECTL_CONTEXT apply -f - <<EOF

Reviewer: need to remove the --context here as it is not used anywhere else

EOF
```

Wait for the `ClusterIssuer` to become ready.

```bash
kubectl wait clusterissuer/${KUADRANT_CLUSTER_ISSUER_NAME} --for=condition=ready=true
```

### Deploy a Gateway

> For now, the Gateway is set to accept an `HTTPRoute` from the same namespace only. This allows the ability to restrict who can use the Gateway until it is ready for general use.

Reviewer 2: This read a little funny, maybe something like:

```suggestion
At present, the Gateway is limited to accepting `HTTPRoute` resources only from its own namespace. This restriction helps control access, ensuring the Gateway remains secure until it is ready for wider use.
```

made it a little less passive voice

        - group: ""
          kind: Secret
          name: api-${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}-tls
        mode: Terminate
EOF
```

Check the status of your Gateway ensuring the gateway is Accepted and Programmed:

```bash
kubectl get gateway ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME} -n ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS} -o=jsonpath='{.status.conditions[?(@.type=="Accepted")].message}{"\n"}{.status.conditions[?(@.type=="Programmed")].message}'
```

Check the status of your listener you will see that it is not yet programmed or ready to accept traffic due to bad TLS configuration. This will be fixed in the next step with the TLS Policy

```bash
kubectl get gateway ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME} -n ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS} -o=jsonpath='{.status.listeners[0].conditions[?(@.type=="Programmed")].message}'
```

### Deploy the gateway TLS policy

```bash
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: kuadrant.io/v1
kind: TLSPolicy
metadata:
  name: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}-tls
  namespace: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS}
spec:
  targetRef:
    name: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}
    group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: Gateway
  issuerRef:
    group: cert-manager.io
    kind: ClusterIssuer
    name: ${KUADRANT_CLUSTER_ISSUER_NAME}
EOF
```

> Check that your TLS policy has an accepted and Enforced status.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Check that your `TLSPolicy` has an accepted and Enforced status.
```

```bash
kubectl get tlspolicy ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}-tls -n ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS} -o=jsonpath='{.status.conditions[?(@.type=="Accepted")].message}{"\n"}{.status.conditions[?(@.type=="Enforced")].message}'
```

> ### Secure and protect the Gateway with Auth, Rate limit, and DNS policies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Secure and protect the Gateway with Auth, Rate Limit, and DNS policies.
```

While the Gateway is now deployed, it currently has exposed endpoints. The next steps will be defining an `AuthPolicy` to set up a default `403` response for any unprotected endpoints, as well as a `RateLimitPolicy` to set up a default unrealistic low global limit to further protect any exposed endpoints.

### Set the deny all Gateway Auth policy

```bash
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: kuadrant.io/v1
kind: AuthPolicy
metadata:
  name: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}-auth
  namespace: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS}
spec:
  targetRef:
    group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: Gateway
    name: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}
  defaults:
   rules:
    authorization:
      deny-all:
        opa:
          rego: "allow = false"
    response:
      unauthorized:
        headers:
          "content-type":
            value: application/json
        body:
          value: |
            {
              "error": "Forbidden",
              "message": "Access denied by default by the gateway operator. If you are the administrator of the service, create a specific auth policy for the route."
            }
EOF
```

> Check that your auth policy has accepted and enforced status

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Check that your `AuthPolicy` has accepted and enforced status
```

```bash
kubectl get authpolicy ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}-auth -n ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS} -o=jsonpath='{.status.conditions[?(@.type=="Accepted")].message}{"\n"}{.status.conditions[?(@.type=="Enforced")].message}'

```

> ### Deploy the low default Gateway Rate limit policy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Deploy a low-limit default Gateway Rate limit policy
```

EOF
```

Wait for the `ClusterIssuer` to become ready.

```bash
kubectl wait clusterissuer/${KUADRANT_CLUSTER_ISSUER_NAME} --for=condition=ready=true
```

### Deploy a Gateway

```bash
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}
  namespace: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS}
  labels:
    kuadrant.io/gateway: "true"
spec:
    gatewayClassName: istio
    listeners:
    - allowedRoutes:
        namespaces:
          from: All 

>       hostname: "*.${KUADRANT_ZONE_ROOT_DOMAIN}"

Reviewer: might not be the worst ides to specify a none wildcard here as it would allow a healthcheck then also

Author: cool ill add it in

      name: api
      port: 443
      protocol: HTTPS
      tls:
        certificateRefs:
        - group: ""
          kind: Secret
          name: api-${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}-tls
        mode: Terminate
EOF
```

Check the status of the `Gateway` ensuring the gateway is Accepted and Programmed:

```bash
kubectl get gateway ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME} -n ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS} -o=jsonpath='{.status.conditions[?(@.type=="Accepted")].message}{"\n"}{.status.conditions[?(@.type=="Programmed")].message}'
```

Check the status of the listener, you will see that it is not yet programmed or ready to accept traffic due to bad TLS configuration. This will be fixed in the next step with the `TLSPolicy`:

```bash
kubectl get gateway ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME} -n ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS} -o=jsonpath='{.status.listeners[0].conditions[?(@.type=="Programmed")].message}'
```

> ### Deploy the gateway TLS policy

Reviewer: We are securing the gateway in this step also as TLS based communication is a key piece to secure communications between client and gateway

Author: ok ill move the secure the gateway heading up further

```bash
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: kuadrant.io/v1
kind: TLSPolicy
metadata:
  name: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}-tls
  namespace: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS}
spec:
  targetRef:
    name: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}
    group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: Gateway
  issuerRef:
    group: cert-manager.io
    kind: ClusterIssuer
    name: ${KUADRANT_CLUSTER_ISSUER_NAME}
EOF
```

> Check that the `TLSpolicy` has an Accepted and Enforced status:

Reviewer: I think we should mention this can take a few minutes for a provider like lets-encrypt

        - action: replace
          regex: (\d+);(([A-Fa-f0-9]{1,4}::?){1,7}[A-Fa-f0-9]{1,4})
          replacement: "[\$2]:\$1"
          sourceLabels:
            [
              "__meta_kubernetes_pod_annotation_prometheus_io_port",
              "__meta_kubernetes_pod_ip",
            ]
          targetLabel: "__address__"
        - action: replace
          regex: (\d+);((([0-9]+?)(\.|$)){4})
          replacement: "\$2:\$1"
          sourceLabels:
            [
              "__meta_kubernetes_pod_annotation_prometheus_io_port",
              "__meta_kubernetes_pod_ip",
            ]
          targetLabel: "__address__"
        - action: labeldrop
          regex: "__meta_kubernetes_pod_label_(.+)"
        - sourceLabels: ["__meta_kubernetes_namespace"]
          action: replace
          targetLabel: namespace
        - sourceLabels: ["__meta_kubernetes_pod_name"]
          action: replace
          targetLabel: pod_name
EOF
```

### Override the Gateway's deny-all AuthPolicy 

### Set up API key auth flow

Set up an example API key for the new users:

```bash
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: v1
kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: toystore-api-key

>   namespace: ${KUADRANT_DEVELOPER_NS}

Reviewer 2: seem to be missing creating two secrets for the two users here?

e.g. https://github.com/Kuadrant/kuadrant-operator/blob/9646edb410519330a1c89559b505c9da226f0801/doc/user-guides/full-walkthrough/secure-protect-connect-k8s.md#override-the-gateways-deny-all-authpolicy

EOF
```

> Before continuing on and creating the DNS policy to allow traffic to the Gateway, check the Rate limit policy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before continuing on and creating the DNS policy to allow traffic to the Gateway, check the `RateLimitPolicy`:
```

has been accepted and enforced

```bash
kubectl get ratelimitpolicy ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}-rlp -n ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS} -o=jsonpath='{.status.conditions[?(@.type=="Accepted")].message}{"\n"}{.status.conditions[?(@.type=="Enforced")].message}'
```

### Create the gateway DNS policy

```bash
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: kuadrant.io/v1
kind: DNSPolicy
metadata:
  name: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}-dnspolicy
  namespace: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS}
spec:
  loadBalancing:
    defaultGeo: true
    geo: GEO-NA
    weight: 120
  targetRef:
    name: ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}
    group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
    kind: Gateway
  providerRefs:
  - name: aws-credentials # Secret created earlier
EOF
```

Check that the `DNSPolicy` has been accepted and enforced.

```bash
kubectl get dnspolicy ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME}-dnspolicy -n ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS} -o=jsonpath='{.status.conditions[?(@.type=="Accepted")].message}{"\n"}{.status.conditions[?(@.type=="Enforced")].message}'
```

### Create a test HTTP route for the gateway

> The following is a test http route that will allow you to test the default and deny all policies that were just created

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following is a test `HTTPRoute` that will allow you to test the default and deny all policies that were just created:
```

```bash
while :; do curl -k -w "%{http_code}" "https://$(kubectl get httproute test -n ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS} -o=jsonpath='{.spec.hostnames[0]}')" ; sleep 1; done
```

!!! note
    If the above curl command isn't working, another alternative is to use kubectl like below:

    ```bash
    HOST=$(kubectl get httproute test -n ${GATEWAY_NS} -o=jsonpath='{.spec.hostnames[0]}')
    if [ -z "$HOST" ]; then
      echo "Error: Unable to fetch the hostname. Ensure the HTTPRoute exists in the namespace ${GATEWAY_NS}."
      exit 1
    fi
    echo "https://${HOST}"
    kubectl run mycurlpod --image=curlimages/curl -i --tty --restart=Never -- sh <<EOF
    curl -k -w "%{http_code}" "https://${HOST}"
    EOF
    ```

### Open up the Gateway for other namespaces

The Gateway has been configured, secured and tested with Kuadrant policies. It can now be opened up for use by other teams in other namespaces.

```bash
kubectl patch gateway ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NAME} -n ${KUADRANT_GATEWAY_NS} --type='json' -p='[{"op": "replace", "path": "/spec/listeners/0/allowedRoutes/namespaces/from", "value":"All"}]'
```

### (Optional) Configure metrics to be scraped from the Gateway instance

> If prometheus is installed on the cluster, set up a PodMonitor to configure it to scrape metrics directly from the Gateway pod.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If Prometheus is installed on the cluster, set up a `PodMonitor` to configure it to scrape metrics directly from the Gateway pod.
```

> This must be done in the namespace where the Gateway is running. For a list of the metrics you'll get see the Kuadrant [docs](https://docs.kuadrant.io/0.11.0/kuadrant-operator/doc/observability/metrics/)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This must be done in the namespace where the Gateway is running. For a list of the metrics available, see the Kuadrant [docs](https://docs.kuadrant.io/0.11.0/kuadrant-operator/doc/observability/metrics/)
```

while :; do curl -k --write-out '%{http_code}\n' --silent --output /dev/null  "https://api.$KUADRANT_ZONE_ROOT_DOMAIN/cars" | grep -E --color "\b(429)\b|$"; sleep 1; done
```

> ### (Optional) Configure metrics to be scraped from the Gateway instance

Reviewer 2: just wondering why removed? isn't it needed for optional dashboard setup?

Author: i agree with Craig its a bit jaring but i do agree we need it. Ill add it at the end as a optional

kind: Secret
metadata:
  name: bob-key

>   namespace: kuadrant-system

Reviewer 2: maybe: be good to have an env-var for the sys ns?
